Overview

We will research and develop cutting-edge technologies to enable ultra-wide bandwidth (UWB) radio astronomy and innovative detection and excision of radio frequency interference (RFI).  This will lay the foundation for the next generation of end-to-end digital signal processing systems (DSP) and spectrometers that can effectively share the radio spectrum with the growing number of commercial, private, and governmental users.  We will integrate new analog to digital converters (ADCs) and field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), develop firmware for interfacing these technologies with peripheral systems, and determine optimal methods for handling very high data rates.  We will also create a standard procedure for testing and validating RFI excision algorithms that will build confidence in their use among scientists, and incorporate new RFI excision algorithms into firmware designs that are only made possible by hardware improvements.  We will include a two-week undergraduate internship program aimed at first-generation college students and support a full-summer research experience for an additional student.

Intellectual Merit

The next generation of very fast ADCs and powerful FPGAs are opening new possibilities for sampling of ultra-wide bandwidths directly at radio frequencies, and also provide the resources needed to realize real-time RFI excision.  This is important for building systems that are robust against the effects of RFI.  However, significant research and development is needed to realize this potential.  Our work will be prototyped using a revolutionary new UWB radio receiver under development by the Green Bank Observatory that will be optimized for the study of the low-frequency gravitational wave universe, radio transients such as fast radio bursts, and rich molecular line regions.  A systematic approach to validating RFI excision techniques will encourage their adoption and be a valuable resource for the wider scientific community.  The totality of our efforts will enable innovative, revolutionary advances in high-impact areas of science and technical development.

Broader Impacts

Our work will enhance infrastructure for research and education by laying the ground work for the next generation of DSP systems.  We will apply our work to future transformational upgrades to the Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope.  We are committed to sharing the results of our work through the CASPER collaboration with the broader community to enable similar advances at other US and world observatories.  Our undergraduate internship program will leverage our membership in the NSF-INCLUDES Alliance to train a twenty-person cohort of STEM professionals drawn from first-generation students.  It will also provide near-peer mentoring opportunities to additional undergraduates.  Both the scientific and educational components of this project will impact an extremely large and diverse community.
